---
tags: 
dg-publish: true
mathLink: 
---
Subject: _EM_
Main\_Topic: _Vector Analysis_
Applications: _None_
Examples: _None_
Class: _None_
Exam: _None_
Textbook: _None_
Closely\_Related\_To: _None_
Cont.\_ of: _None_ 
_
_

There are some important things with vector analysis we should note before getting into the nitty gritty of what Electrodynamics is. We also will not write out the bold font on the vectors since it is quite cumbersome. We will only use it when needed. For vector transformations: see [[Vectors, 1-Forms]] or other differential geometry articles.

###### Triple Products
Since the cross product of two vectors is itself a vector, it can be dotted or crossed with a third vector to form a _triple product_: $A \cdot (B \times C)$. Geometrically, this is the volume of a parallelepiped generated by the vectors. Evidently, 
$$
A \cdot (B \times C) = B \cdot (C \times A) = C \cdot (A \times B)
$$
for they all correspond to the same figure. Also note that the cross product can be changed:
$$
A \cdot (B \times C) = (A \times B) \cdot C
$$
Next, we have the vector triple product, which is $A \times(B \times C)$. This can be simplified by the so called **BAC-CAB** rule: 
$$
A \times(B \times C) = B(A \cdot C) - C(A \cdot B)
$$

###### Gradient 
The gradient represents the change of a function over a space, $\nabla F$. Now, note that if $\nabla F = 0$, then we are stationary. This could be a maximum, minimum, or a saddle point (which is a min in one direction and a max in another direction). We usually treat $\nabla$ as a vector and use vector operations on it, just note that it acts on things and does not multiply. 

There are two main operations from the gradient we can use: 
1. The divergence, $\nabla \cdot v$
2. The curl,  $\nabla \times v$

Observe that the divergence of a vector function is itself a scalar field and the curl of a vector function is a vector field. The divergence measures how spread out a vector $v$ is (or how much it diverges) from the point in question. The curl measures how much the vector swirls around the point in question. The curl can be a bit tricky though, and some fields have $0$ curl when you think they should be swirling. Thus, we must think about Paddington bear opening his arms in the train station about the point in question and see if his marmalade suitcases result in him spinning with the crowd. 

We have some important relations:
$$
\nabla (f+g) = \nabla f + \nabla g, \quad \nabla \cdot (A+B) = (\nabla \cdot A) + (\nabla \cdot B)
$$
$$
\nabla \times (A + B) = (\nabla \times A) + (\nabla \times B)
$$
and for all the gradient, divergence, and curl we can pull out constants inside which are acting on the vectors. 

Finally, note that we have two ways to make a vector, two ways to construct a scalar, and so we have $6$ total product rules (two for gradients):
$$
\nabla(fg) = f \nabla g + g \nabla f
$$
$$
\nabla (A \cdot B) = A \times (\nabla \times B) + B \times (\nabla \times A) + (A \cdot \nabla )B + (B \cdot \nabla) A
$$
two for divergences: 
$$
\nabla \cdot (f A) = f(\nabla \cdot A) + A \cdot(\nabla f)
$$
$$
\nabla \cdot (A \times B) = B \cdot (\nabla \times A) - A \cdot (\nabla \times B) 
$$
and two for curls: 
$$
\nabla \times (fA) = f(\nabla \times A) - A \times(\nabla f)
$$
$$
\nabla \times (A \times B) = (B \cdot \nabla) A - (A \cdot \nabla )B = A(\nabla \cdot B) - B(\nabla \cdot A)
$$
These are all derived from the product rule for ordinary derivatives. Now, we note some properties: 
1. $\nabla \cdot (\nabla \times v) = 0$
2. $\nabla \times \nabla v = 0$

###### Helmholtz Theorem
Every since Faraday, the laws of electricity and magnetism have been expressed in terms of fields for electricity and magnetism. Since $E$ and $B$ are vectors, the differential equations naturally involve vector derivatives: the divergence and curl. Now, we have a question: to what extent is a vector function determined by its divergence and curl? 

To answer this question and, Helmholtz created a theorem, basically stating that fields are uniquely determined by their divergence and curl (considering specific boundary conditions, one of which can be fields going to 0 at infinity). 

If the curl of a vector vanishes everywhere, then
$$
\nabla \times F = 0 \iff F = -\nabla V
$$
Note that this vector potential $V$ is not unique, and can be determined up to a constant. If the divergence of a vector field vanishes everywhere, then $F$ can be expressed as the curl of a vector potential
$$
\nabla \cdot F = 0 \iff F = \nabla \times A
$$
Note that this vector potential $A$ is also not unique, since the gradient of any scalar can be added to $A$ without affecting the curl since the curl of a gradient is zero.

Now, we can finally say that for a vector field $F$, then
$$
F = -\nabla V + \nabla \times A
$$