---
tags: tangent, normal, Multivariable, Math, vectors, tangent_vector, acceleration, unit_tangent, unit_normal, 
dg-publish: true
mathLink: 
---
Subject: _Multivariable_
Main\_Topic: _Tangent and Normal Vectors_
Applications: _Acceleration, Curvature, Speed, Forces/Dynamics_
Examples: _None_
Class: _None_
Exam: _None_
Textbook: _None_
Closely\_Related\_To: _[[Directional Derivative]]_
Cont.\_ of: _None_ 
_
_
The _Normal_ and _Tangent_ vectors represented the velocity or slope of a point on a curve and a curve's orientation at each point. 

```ad-Definition
Lets say we have the vector $\vec{r}(t)$ which represents a curve. We define the Unit Tangent Vector as 
$$
\hat{\pmb{T}} = \frac{r'(t)}{|r'(t)|}.
$$
This vector represents the direction of the slope of the curve at each point.

We then define a vector to represent the direction of the normal on a curve at each point, 
$$
\hat{\pmb{N}} = \frac{\hat{\pmb{T}}'(t)}{|\hat{\pmb{T}}'(t)|}
$$
This can actually be checked by taking the dot product between $\hat T$ and $\hat N$
```

##### Acceleration
Acceleration along a curve has a tangential and normal component. This is due to the centripetal force (radial) and a tangential force (one acting in the direction of motion). We can create a basis in which to separate these forces into components. Along a 2d curve, this can be most simply done by using the tangent and normal vectors since they are orthogonal and create a basis about $R^{2}$. We can thus write any acceleration along a 2D curve in this fashion since it spans $R^{2}$. 

Thus, we allow ourselves to write the acceleration in terms of this [[Vector Linear Algebra#Basis|basis]] and define the following:
$$
a_{t}=\vec{a}\cdot \hat T , \quad a_{N}=\vec{a}\cdot \hat N
$$
such that 
$$
\vec{a}=a_{N}\hat N + a_{T}\hat T
$$
where $a=r''(t)$. 

---
In the 2D scenario we were able to use reasoning to see that 2 vectors could create a basis and span the set of possible accelerations. But what about 3 dimensions ([[The R3 Vector Space]])? If we define 
$$
\vec{a}=\frac{d\vec{v}}{dt} = \frac{d}{dt}\left(\frac{\vec{v}}{|\vec{v}|}|\vec{v}|\right) = \frac{d}{dt}(|\vec{v}|\hat T)  
$$
we can rewrite this using the chain rule as 
$$
\vec{a}=\frac{d|\vec{v}|}{dt}\hat T + |\vec{v}|\frac{d\hat T}{dt} = \frac{d|\vec{v}|}{dt}\hat T + |\vec{v}| \left|\frac{d\hat T}{dt}\right| \hat N = \frac{d|\vec{v}|}{dt}\hat T+\kappa|\vec{v}|^{2}\hat N = a_{T}\hat T + a_{N}\hat N
$$
where 
$$
\kappa=\frac{1}{|\vec{v}|}\left|\frac{d\hat T}{dt}\right|
$$
is defined as the curvature of the curve. We define these coefficients in front of the Unit Normal and Unit Tangent vector to be $a_{N}$ and $a_{T}$. Since the Tangent and Normal vector are orthogonal, if we were to take the dot product between the acceleration $a$ and either $\hat T$ or $\hat N$, then we would just get back $a_T$ or $a_{N}$. From this we also have
$$
|\vec{a}|= \sqrt{a_{N}^{2}+a_{T}^{2}}
$$

We can thus justify this with the linear algebra: the acceleration lies within the 2D plane created from the $\hat T$ and $\hat N$ vectors. So while the acceleration is a 3 dimensional object, it lies within a 2D plane created with the basis generated by the Unit Tangent and Unit Normal vectors. This vectors span this plane, allowing us to write the acceleration as the linear combination of such. We can then define these components of the tangent and normal components as $a_{N}$ and $a_{T}$ such that they are the projection of the acceleration onto these basis vectors.