---
tags:
  - Math
  - cyclic
  - group
  - groups
  - symmetry
  - generator
  - theorem
  - abstract
  - Algebra
dg-publish: true
mathLink:
---
Subject: _Abstract Algebra_
Main\_Topic: _Cyclic Groups_
Applications: _Group Theory and Symmetries_
Examples: _None_
Class: _Intro to Algebraic Systems_
Exam: _Exam 1_
Textbook: _[[Joseph A. Gallian - Contemporary abstract algebra-Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (HMH) (1989) (1).pdf]]_
Closely\_Related\_To: _[[Groups]],[[Finite Groups, Subgroups]]_
Cont.\_ of: _None_ 
_
_

```ad-Definition
A group $G$ is called _cyclic_ if there is an element $a$ in $G$ such that $G=\{a^{n} \rvert \ n \in Z\}$. Such an element $a$ is called a _generator_ of $G$. 
```

In view of the notation introduced in [[Finite Groups, Subgroups]], we may indicate that $G$ is a cyclic group generated by $a$ by writing $G=\left< a \right>$. Note that not all groups are cyclic. For example, $U(8)$ isn't. 

##### Criterion for $a^{i}=a^{j}$
**Theorem 4.1**  Let $G$ be a group, and let $a$ belong to $G$. If $a$ has infinite order, then all distinct powers of $a$ are distinct group elements. If $a$ has finite order, say $n$, then $\left<a \right> = \{e,a,a^{2},\ldots,a^{n-1}\}$ and $a^{i}=a^{j}$ if and only if $n$ divides $i-j$.

**Proof:**  If $a$ has infinite order, there is no nonzero $n$ such that $a^{n}$ is the identity. Since $a^{i}=a^{j}$ implies $a^{i-j}=e$, we must have $i-j=0$ and the first statement of the theorem is proved. 

Now assume $|a|=n$. We will prove that $\left<a \right> = \{e,a,\ldots,a^{n-1}\}$. Certainly, the elements $e,a,\ldots,a^{n-1}$ are distinct. For if $a^{i}=a^{j}$ with $0 \leq j < i \leq n-1$, then $a^{i-j}=e$. But this contradicts the fact that $n$ is the least positive integer such that $a^{n}$ is the identity. 

Now, suppose that $a^{k}$ is an arbitrary member of $\left<a \right>$. By the division algorithm, there exists integers $q$ and $r$ such that 
$$
k=qn+r \quad \text{with} \quad 0\leq r < n.
$$
Then $a^{k}=a^{qn}a^{r} = (a^{n})^{q}a^{r}=ea^{r}=a^{r}$ so that $a^{r} \in \{e,a,\ldots,a^{n-1}\}$. This proves that $\left<a \right> = \{e,a,\ldots,a^{n-1}\}$. 

Next, we assume that $a^{i}=a^{j}$ and prove that $n$ divides $i-j$. We begin by observing that $a^{i}=a^{j}$ implies that $a^{i-j}=e$. Again, by the division algorithm, there are integers $q$ and $r$ such that 
$$
i-j = qn+r \quad \text{with} \quad 0\leq r < n
$$
Then $a^{i-j}=a^{qn+r}$ and, therefore, $a^{i-j}=ea^{r}=a^{r}$. Since $n$ is the least positive integer such that $a^{n}$ is the identity, we must have $r=0$ so that $n$ divides $i-j$. Conversely, if $n$ divides $i-j$, then $a^{i-j}=a^{nq}=e^{q}=e$ so that $a^{i}=a^{j}$. 

---
**Corollary**  Let $G$ be a group and $a$ an element of $G$ of order $n$. If $a^{k}=e$, then $n$ divides $k$. 

**Proof:**  Since $a^{k}=e=a^{0}$, we have, by Theorem 4.1, that $n$ divides $k-0$. 

**Remark.**  This is simply a special case of Theorem 4.1. 

---
What is important about Theorem 4.1 in the finite case is that it says that multiplication in $\left< a \right>$ is essentially done by _addition_ modulo $n$. That is, if $(i+j) \mod n = k$, then $a^{i} \cdot a^{j}=a^{k}$. Thus, no matter what group $G$ is, or how the element $a$ is chosen, multiplication in $\left<a \right>$ works the same as addition in $Z_{n}$ whenever $|a|=n$. Similarly, if $a$ has infinite order, then multiplication in $\left<a \right>$ works the same as addition in $Z$, since $a^{i}\cdot a^{j}=a^{i+j}$ and no modular arithmetic is done. 

For these reasons, the cyclic groups $Z_{n}$ and $Z$ serve as prototypes for all cyclic groups, and algebraists say that there is essential only one cyclic group for each order. What is meant by this is that, although there may be many different sets of the form $\{a^{n} \vert \ n \in Z\}$, there is essentially only one way to operate on these sets, depending on the order of $a$. Algebraists do not really care what the elements of a set are; they care only about the algebraic properties of the set. 

---
##### Generators of Cyclic Groups 
**Theorem 4.2**  let $G=\left<a \right>$ be a cyclic group of order $n$. Then $G= \left<a^{k} \right>$ if and only if the $\gcd(k,n)=1$. 

**Proof:**  if the $\gcd(k,n)=1$ we may write $1=ku+nv$ for some integers $u$ and $v$. then $a=a^{ku+nv}=a^{ku}\cdot a^{nv}=a^{ku}$. Thus, $a$ belongs to $\left<a^{k} \right>$ and therefore all powers of $a$ belong to $\left<a^{k} \right>$. So, $G= \left<a^{k} \right>$ and $a^{k}$ is a generator of $G$. 

Now suppose that the $\gcd(k,n)=d>1$. Write $k=td$ and $n=sd$. Then $(a^{k})^{s}=(a^{td})^{s}=(a^{sd})^{t}=e$ so that $|a^{k}| \leq s < n$. This shows that $a^{k}$ is not a generator of $G$. 

Taking $G=Z_{n}$ and $a=1$ in Theorem 4.2, we have the following useful result. 

**Corollary.**  An integer $k$ is a generate of $Z_{n}$ if and only if $\gcd(k,n)=1$. 

The value of Theorem 4.2 is that once one generator of a cyclic group has been found, all generators of the cyclic group can easily be determined.

---
##### Fundamental Theorem of Cyclic Groups
**Theorem 4.3**  Every subgroup of a cyclic group is cyclic. If $|\left<a \right>|=n$, then the order of any subgroup of $\left<a \right>$ is a divisor of $n$; and, for each divisor $k$ of $n$, the group $\left<a \right>$ has exactly one subgroup of order $k$, namely, $\left<a^\frac{n}{k}\right>$. 

**Proof:**  The proof is long and tedious. It can be seen in Chapter 4 of the [[Joseph A. Gallian - Contemporary abstract algebra-Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (HMH) (1989) (1).pdf|algebraic systems textbook]]. 

---
**Corollary.**  For each divisor $k$ of $n$ the set $\left<\frac{n}{k} \right>$ is the unique subgroup of $Z_{n}$ of order $k$; moreover, these are the only subgroups of $Z_{n}$. 

##### Number of Elements of Each Order in a Cyclic Group
By combining Theorems 4.2 and 4.3, we can easily count the number of elements of each order in a finite cyclic group. For convenience, we introduce an important number-theoretic function called the [[Euler Totient Function]]. Notice that $|U(n)|=\phi(n)$. 

**Theorem 4.4**  If $d$ is a divisor of $n$, the number of elements of order $d$ in a cyclic group of order $n$ is $\phi(d)$. 

The relationship between the various subgroups of a group can be illustrated with a _subgroup lattice_ of the group.

**Remark.**  One final remark about the important of cyclic groups is appropriate. Although cyclic groups constitute a very narrow class of finite groups, as we will see later on, they play the role of building blocks for all finite Abelian groups in much the same way that primes are the building blocks for the integers and the chemical elements are the building blocks for the chemical compounds. 


